**imperative commands 命令式** means using CLIs directly. Disadvantage:

- Impaired reproducibility
- Lacking version control
- Lacking support for GitOps

**declarative commands 声明式** is a way to manage resources using manifest file (`YAML` or `JSON`)


Both Kubernetes and Openshift have both **imperative** and **declarative** options. However in production, we recommend to use **imperative** for developing and experimenting, **declarative** for deploying, maintaining and documenting. 


# Create Manifest
1. Use the YAML view of a resource from the web console.
2. Use imperative commands with the `--dry-run=client` option to generate manifests. E.g.:
```bash
kubectl create deployment hello-openshift -o yaml \
    --image registry.ocp4.example.com:8443/redhattraining/hello-world-nginx:v1.0 \
    --save-config \ 
    --dry-run=client \ 
    > ~/my-app/example-deployment.yaml
```

    - The `--save-config` option adds configuration attributes that declarative commands use. For deployments resources, this option saves the resource configuration in an `kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration` annotation.

    - The `--dry-run=client` option prevents the command from creating resources in the cluster.

!!! tip "Doc"
    Use `kubectl explain deployment.spec.template.spec` to see the details of the field `deployment.spec.template.spec`

!!! tip "Multiple src in single Manifest"
    Use a line of `---` to separate the resources


# Customize Manifest
1. Remove empty fields
2. Changing attributes such as `namespace`, `spec.replicas` or `spec.template.spec.containers[].ports.containerPort`


# Create src with Manifest
Creating with 1 Manifest file (or a URL):

```bash
kubectl create -f resource.yaml
kubectl apply -f resource.yaml

kubectl create -f https://example.com/example-apps/deployment.yaml
```

Create with alll Manifest files under one directory
```bash
kubectl create -R -f ~/my-app
```

# Update src with Manifest
The `kubectl apply` command writes the Manifest contents to the `kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration` annotation. 

!!! note ""
    Use `--save-config` in `kubectl create` command to produce the required annotations for future `kubectl apply` commands to operate.
    
    The `kubectl apply` command uses the `last-applied-configuration` annotation to identify fields that are removed from the configuration file and that must be cleared from the live configuration.

```bash
kubectl apply -f resource.yaml
```

!!! warning "Compare: `apply` vs `create`"
    ||`kubectl apply`|`kubectl create`|
    |:--|:--|:--|
    |Type|**declarative**|**imperative**|
    |Consider the current state of a live resource?|Yes, compare:<br/> 1.<ins>live configuration</ins> <br/>2.<ins>Manifest file configuration</ins> <br/>3.<ins>configuration in the annotation `last-applied-configuration`</ins>|No|
    |Can update a live resource?|Yes|No|

If an updated Manifest changes only values in Secret or ConfigMap, the updated Manifest does NOT generate new pods automatically. Instead:

- use `oc rollout restart deployment deployment-name` to _force the restart_.
- if `spec.replica` == 1, you can also delete the previous pod.


# Patch Manifest
The `oc patch` command updates or adds fields in an existing object:

```bash
oc patch deployment hello -p \
    '{"spec":{"template":{"spec":{"resources":{"requests":{"cpu": "100m"}}}}}}'
```

patch an object from a patch file:

```bash
oc patch deployment hello --patch-file ~/volume-mount.yaml
```

# Validate Manifest

- `--dry-run=server`: submits a server-side request without persisting the resource.
- `--validate=true`: uses a schema to validate the input and fails the request if it is invalid.

!!! warning "Compare: `server` vs `client`"
    两者都不会真正创建或更新资源。

    ||`--dry-run=client`|`--dry-run=server`|
    |:--|:--|:--|
    |where?|在本地进行验证，不会与 Kubernetes 服务器交互。|在服务器端进行验证。它将把配置文件发送到 Kubernetes API 服务器，由服务器检查文件内容是否在集群中有效（例如，字段值是否正确、资源是否存在等）|
    |suitable for|检查 YAML 文件的基本格式和结构，适合快速检查配置文件是否有明显错误|更严格，适合需要精确验证的场景|

# Compare Manifest
Use the `kubectl diff`/`oc diff` command to review differences between live objects and manifests. 